.TH STETHOSCOPE 1 "2026-07-11" "stethoscope 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
stethoscope \- vital signs for a Mac
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B stethoscope
.B tui
.br
.B stethoscope
.B disk
.RI [ top ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-once " | " \-\-duration " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope disk inspect
.I pid
.br
.B stethoscope disk holds
.I pid
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope disk busy
.I volume-or-device
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope disk tui
.br
.B stethoscope cpu
.RI [ top " | " wakeups ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-once " | " \-\-duration " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope memory
.RI [ top ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-once " | " \-\-duration " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope memory watch
.I pid
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-once " | " \-\-duration " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope battery
.RI [ health ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope battery top
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-once " | " \-\-duration " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope battery drainers
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope battery inspect
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope smart
.RI [ status ]
.RI [ disk ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope checkup
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-since " WHEN" ]
.RB [ \-\-store " DIR" ]
.br
.B stethoscope triage
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-since " WHEN" ]
.RB [ \-\-store " DIR" ]
.br
.B stethoscope anomaly
.RI { deviation | leaks | runaway | triage }
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-since " WHEN" ]
.RB [ \-\-store " DIR" ]
.br
.B stethoscope record
.RB [ \-\-once " | " \-\-duration " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-interval " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-store " DIR" ]
.RB [ \-\-retention\-days " N" ]
.br
.B stethoscope history
.RI [ scope ]
.RB [ \-\-since " WHEN" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-store " DIR" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope history baseline
.RI [ scope ]
.RB [ \-\-since " WHEN" ]
.RB [ \-\-limit " N" ]
.RB [ \-\-store " DIR" ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B stethoscope mcp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B stethoscope
is a macOS-only, system-Python-3, standard-library tool.  It exposes native
process, memory, power, disk, and drive-health probes through human CLI output,
a unified curses interface, strict JSON documents, and a read-only MCP server.
There is no third-party runtime dependency.  The
.B smartctl
binary is optional detail for SMART data.
.PP
Options are command-specific.  Static commands reject sampling flags, and
human-only commands reject JSON flags.  Numeric intervals, limits, durations,
and retention periods must be positive and finite where applicable.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B tui
Open the centralized five-tab disk, CPU, memory, battery, and drives interface.
Keys 1 through 5 select tabs; Tab cycles; arrows or j/k move; p or Space pauses;
+/\- changes rate; d explicitly runs triage; [/] selects a finding; Enter opens
its evidence; q or Escape quits.  On disk, v switches process/volume views.
Process actions are Enter/f for files, i for inspect, and x for confirmed
SIGTERM.  Volume actions are Enter/r for holders and e for confirmed unmount.
.TP
.B disk top
Rank per-process read and write rates.  Default command for the disk scope.
.TP
.BI "disk inspect " pid
Run a human-only live
.B fs_usage
trace.  Requires root and accepts no options.
.TP
.BI "disk holds " pid
List on-disk files held by one process.
.TP
.BI "disk busy " target
Resolve a mount, volume name, device, or whole disk and list visible holders.
Returns 1 when holders exist.
.TP
.B disk tui
Compatibility entry point for the unified TUI, initially on disk.
.TP
.B cpu top
Rank interval CPU use and report real flavor-6 watts when available, lifetime
CPU time and awake-age duty, and both wakeup counters.
.TP
.B cpu wakeups
Use the same document as CPU top, ranked by total wakeups for presentation.
Package-idle and interrupt rates remain separate detector inputs.
.TP
.B memory top
Rank physical footprints and report system memory and pressure.
.TP
.BI "memory watch " pid
Sample one PID, report footprint slope, and latch a leak candidate.  A missing
PID is a usage result; an existing but inaccessible PID is a permission result.
.TP
.B battery health
Report presence, charge, capacity, cycles, condition, and signed battery flow.
.TP
.B battery top
Rank real flavor-6 energy rate where present and Apple's separately labeled
unitless Energy Impact score.
.TP
.B battery drainers
Rank cumulative activity since the validated current-unplug baseline.
.TP
.B battery inspect
Use root-only powermetrics detail.  Its Energy Impact remains unitless.
.TP
.B smart status
Report all physical drives, or one optional disk.  diskutil provides the base
verdict; optional smartctl adds wear, endurance, temperature, and warnings.
.TP
.B checkup
Run a one-shot five-vital exam and canonical triage.  Default interval is one
second, limit 20, history window 24 hours, and the canonical store.
.TP
.B triage
Rank baseline deviation, leaks, runaways, and point-health findings.
.TP
.B anomaly
Run exactly one of deviation, leaks, runaway, or triage.  Anomaly and triage
reject \-\-once and \-\-duration; interval is at most 60 seconds and limit at
most 256.
.TP
.B record
Append completed intervals as daily
.B baseline-raw/1
JSONL.  Defaults: 60-second interval, limit 20, retention 30 days.  Interval is
at most one day, explicit duration 365 days, and retention 3650 days.
.TP
.B history
Summarize a selected optional scope since WHEN.  The baseline form returns
per-context, per-local-hour p50/p90/p99 buckets.  WHEN accepts values such as
3h, an ISO timestamp, or a local clock such as 3am.
.TP
.B mcp
Serve MCP protocol 2025-11-25 as strict UTF-8 newline-delimited JSON-RPC 2.0 on
standard input/output.  The ten read-only tools are disk_top, disk_holds,
disk_busy, cpu_top, cpu_wakeups, memory_top, battery_health, battery_top,
smart_status, and checkup.  The server does not expose record, history stores,
battery drainers, inspect, kill, or eject.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit strict
.B stethoscope/1
JSON instead of human output.  Streaming commands emit one document per
completed interval.
.TP
.B \-\-once
Complete one requested live interval and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-duration " N"
Continue emitting completed intervals until at least N seconds elapsed.
.TP
.BI \-\-interval " N"
Set the sample interval in seconds.
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " N"
Set the maximum ranked rows or per-metric history rows.
.TP
.BI \-\-since " WHEN"
Set the history start for checkup, triage, anomaly, or history.
.TP
.BI \-\-store " DIR"
Override the recording/history corpus.
.TP
.BI \-\-retention\-days " N"
Set record retention in days.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.stethoscope/baseline-raw/YYYY-MM-DD.jsonl
Append-only recording corpus, one strict
.B baseline-raw/1
object per line.
.TP
.I ~/.stethoscope/battery_baseline.json
Schema-validated, atomically replaced
.B battery-baseline/1
state for the current unplug session.
.PP
Under sudo, these paths resolve to the invoking user's home; they do not
silently split state into /var/root.
.SH PERMISSIONS AND LIMITATIONS
Non-root operation is the default.  macOS may hide other users' process
accounting, names, holders, and energy.  Commands that remain useful mark JSON
partial with reasons such as
.B not_root
instead of failing.  disk inspect and battery inspect require root; memory watch
can return a permission failure for an inaccessible existing process.
.PP
Missing batteries and physical drives are supported absent states.  Missing
smartctl is optional partial detail.  Real per-process watts are null where
rusage flavor 6 is unavailable; the modeled energy score is unitless.  A cold
or empty history is valid, while malformed, non-finite, overlong, or truncated
JSONL is partial and exits 4.  MCP preserves OS permissions and can reveal
sensitive process names, PIDs, users, and paths; use least privilege.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Completed with no command-defined reportable finding.  For checkup, triage, and
anomaly, advisory info/warn findings also return 0.
.TP
.B 1
Completed with a reportable condition.  Examples include disk holders, a
latched memory leak, degraded battery/SMART health, or a critical canonical
triage/checkup finding.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid invocation.
.TP
.B 3
Required permission unavailable.
.TP
.B 4
Probe, transport, store, replay, or runtime failure.
.PP
For MCP tool calls, command exits 0 and 1 are successful results
(
.B isError: false
); 2, 3, and 4 set
.B isError: true
.
.SH SEE ALSO
The repository's
.BR README.md ,
.BR SCHEMA.md ,
.BR docs/agent-walkthrough.md ,
.BR ARCHITECTURE.md ,
.BR DESIGN.md ,
and
.BR docs/review-disposition.md .
